# Energy-delay optimization of a three-stage CMOS buffer

## Abstract

Power consumption has become the primary design issue in today's CMOS integrated circuits. To address this issue, various low-power design techniques have been developed that achieve the best trade-off between performance and energy efficiency.
This paper focuses on the design and analysis of a three-stage CMOS buffer using the LTspice tool. The goal is to find the best energy-delay trade-off by varying the aspect ratio, and therefore the dimensions, of the second and third inverters. This is achieved through Monte Carlo simulation, with respect to the dimensions of the first inverter (minimum size). This simulation is performed in cases where the capacitive load of the last stage is an inverter sized 50 and 100 times the minimum inverter. This is achieved by deriving the so-called empirical Pareto optimal curve, i.e., the envelope of the points in the energy-delay space obtained following the simulation. The optimal Pareto curve itself is obtained using the sensitivity analysis methodology: through a numerical optimization tool in MATLAB and the buffer energy and delay models calibrated to the technology used, following the calculation of the characteristic parameters $$\tau$$<sub>nom</sub>, $$\gamma$$<sub>d</sub>, $$\gamma$$<sub>e</sub> and C<sub>g,min</sub> the aspect ratios of the second and third inverters that minimize energy consumption are obtained for an appropriate set of delay constraints. These are used to simulate the buffer and obtain the corresponding real points in the energy-delay space. The set of these points constitutes the optimal Pareto curve obtained through sensitivity analysis.
